---
title: Logical Connectives
---

# Logical Connectives

somewhere in an overall statement to make the variable proposition into a proper mathematical statement.
### 4.5.1 And To say "P and Q" is True means that both statements have the truth value: True. If either one of the statements P or Q were False, then the statement "P and Q" would be False, as well. This definition encapsulates this idea:
<div class="def-definition" markdown>
**Definition 4.5.1. We use the symbol " $\wedge$" between two mathematical state-**
</div>
ments to mean "and". For instance, we read "$P \wedgeQ$" as "P and Q". This is referred to as the conjunction of P and Q. The truth value of "$P \wedgeQ$" is True when both P and Q are true, and the truth value is False otherwise. Here are some examples to demonstrate this definition:
Example 4.5.2.
$(1 + 3 = 4) \wedge( \forall x \in \mathbb{R}. x2 \geq 0) True (1 + 3 = 5) \wedge( \forall x \in \mathbb{R}. x2 \geq 0) False (1 + 3 = 5) \wedge( \exists x \in \mathbb{Q}$. x2 = 2) False Notation: $Parentheses It's sometimes common to drop the parentheses that we used in the examples above. For example, the first line in the above example can be written equivalently as 1 + 3 = 4 \wedge \forall x \in \mathbb{R}. x2 \geq$0 Using the parentheses tends to make the statement more readable. Without them, we have to think for a few extra moments about where one part of the statement ends and the next one begins, but we can still eventually make sense of it. We will try to use parentheses whenever they make a statement more easily understandable. Notation: Sets and Logic You might notice the similarity between the logical connective " $\wedge$" and the set operator " $\cap$". This is not a coincidence! As we will discuss below in Section 4.5.4, we can write the definition of " $\cap$" using the connective " $\wedge$" because of the underlying logic of that set operator. Try it now, and then glance ahead to that section briefly, if you'd like. In general, though, be careful to keep these two notations separate! If A and B are sets, the phrase "$A \wedgeB$" is not well-defined; what was meant is "A $\cap B$".


> ΏθΘρΏθΘ│ **ώΑ╗ϋ╛ΣϋΒΦύ╗ΥϋψΞΎ╝ΙLogical ConnectivesΎ╝Κ** ϋΒΦύ╗ΥϋψΞί░ΗύχΑίΞΧίΣ╜ώλαύ╗ΕίΡΙόΙΡίνΞίΡΙίΣ╜ώλαΎ╝ΝόαψώΑ╗ϋ╛ΣόΟρύΡΗύγΕίθ║όευί╖ξίΖ╖ήΑΓόευϋΛΓϊ╗Μύ╗ΞίδδύπΞϊ╕╗ϋοΒϋΒΦύ╗ΥϋψΞίΠΛίΖ╢ίΡτϊ╣ΚήΑΓ


### 4.5.2 Or To say "P or Q" is True means that "P is True, or Q is True". We need to know that one of the statements is True to declare that the entire statement has the truth value True. We don't care whether both P and Q are true or not, merely that at least one of them is true. This is in contrast with the so-called "exclusive OR" of computer science, also known as XOR, which declares "P XOR Q" to be False when both P and Q are True. In mathematics, we use the inclusive "or". We only care whether at least one of the statements holds.
<div class="def-definition" markdown>
**$Definition 4.5.3. We use the symbol \veebetween two mathematical statements$**
</div>
to mean "or". For instance, we read "$P \veeQ$" as "P or Q". This is referred to as the disjunction of P and Q. The truth value of "$P \veeQ$" is True when at least one of P and Q is True (even when both are True), and the truth value is False otherwise.
Example 4.5.4.
$(1 + 3 = 4) \vee( \forall x \in \mathbb{R}. x2 \geq 0) True (1 + 3 = 5) \vee( \forall x \in \mathbb{R}. x2 \geq 0) True (1 + 3 = 5) \vee( \exists x \in \mathbb{R}$. x2 < 0) False Notation The same notes about notation that we mentioned in the previous subsection apply here, as well. First, the use of parentheses---like in the above examples---is helpful but not technically required. We will try to use them whenever it helps, though. Second, you might notice the similarity between the logical connective " $\vee$" and the set operator " $\cup$". Again, this is not a coincidence! Try rewriting the definition of " $\cup$" using " $\vee$", and glance ahead briefly at Section 4.5.4. In general, though, be careful to keep these two notations separate! If A and B are sets, the phrase "$A \veeB$" is not well-defined; what was meant is "A $\cup B$".
### 4.5.3 Conditional Statements This is the hardest logical connective to work with and continually gives students some problems, so we want to be extra careful and clear about this one. We want the statement "If P, then Q" (sometimes written as "P implies Q") to have the truth value True when the truth of Q necessarily follows from the truth of P. That is, we want this statement to be True if the following holds: Whenever P is True, Q is also True.


> ΏθΘρΏθΘ│ **ίΡΙίΠΨΎ╝ΙConjunctionΎ╝Ν$\wedge$Ύ╝Κ** "$P$ ϊ╕Φ $Q$"ίΗβϊ╜ε $P \wedge Q$ήΑΓί╜Υϊ╕Φϊ╗Ζί╜Υ $P$ ίΤΝ $Q$ ίΡΝόΩ╢ϊ╕║ύεθόΩ╢Ύ╝Ν$P \wedge Q$ ϊ╕║ύεθήΑΓϊ╛ΜΎ╝γϋχ╛ $P$ ϊ╕║"ϊ╗ΛίνσόαψίΣρϊ╕Α"Ύ╝Ν$Q$ ϊ╕║"ίερϊ╕Μώδρ"Ύ╝ΝίΙβ $P \wedge Q$ ϋοΒό▒Γϊ╕νϊ╕ςόζκϊ╗╢ίΡΝόΩ╢ό╗κϋ╢│ήΑΓ


Truth Table and Definition Since this is the hardest connective to suss out, semantically, let's introduce the idea of a truth table to make the notation easier: $P Q \negP P \wedgeQ P \veeQ P = \Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ Q =$\Rightarrow P$ T T F T T T T T F F F T F T F T T F T T F F F T F F T T You may have seen a truth table before, in other mathematics courses, but even if you haven't, don't worry! Here's the main idea: $Each column corresponds to a particular mathematical statement and its corresponding truth values. Each row corresponds to a particular assigment of truth values to the constituent statements, P and Q. Notice that there are 4 rows because P and Q can each have one of two different truth values, so there are 4 possible combinations of those choices. Reading across a particular row, we find the corresponding truth values for other statements, based on what the T and F assignments for P and Q are in the first two columns. Notice that the columns for P \wedgeQ and P \veeQ follow the definitions given above. The column for P \wedgeQ has only one T, and it corresponds to the case where both P and Q are True. All other cases make P \wedgeQ a False statement. Likewise, the column for P \veeQ has only one F, and it corresponds to the case where both P and Q are False. All other cases make P \veeQ a True statement. Now, why are the last two columns the way they are$? Let's say that I make the claim "If you work hard, then you will get an A in this course". Here, P is "You work hard" and Q is "You will get an A". When can you call me a liar? When can you declare I told the truth? Certainly, if you work hard and get an A, I told the truth. Also, if you work hard and don't get an A, then I lied to you. However, if you don't work hard, then no matter what happens, you don't get to call me a liar! My claim didn't cover your situation; I was assuming all along you would just work hard! Thus, I didn't speak an untruth and so, by the Law of the Excluded Middle, I did speak the truth. The negation of a lie is a truth. This situation---where the third and fourth rows of the P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ column are True---is known as a false hypothesis. When the statement on the left of the " =$\Rightarrow$" does not hold, then we are not in a situation that is meant to be addressed by the claim, so we cannot assert that the claim is False. Therefore, the claim must be True (again, by the Law of the Excluded Middle). Let's make the proper definition of this symbol and then consider more examples to illustrate the definition.
<div class="def-definition" markdown>
**Definition 4.5.5. We use the symbol " =$\Rightarrow$" between to mathematical state-**
</div>
ments to mean "If . . . then" or "implies". For instance, we read "P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$" as "If P, then Q" or "P implies Q". This is referred to as a conditional statement.


> ΏθΘρΏθΘ│ **όηΡίΠΨΎ╝ΙDisjunctionΎ╝Ν$\vee$Ύ╝Κ** "$P$ όΙΨ $Q$"ίΗβϊ╜ε $P \vee Q$ήΑΓί╜ΥϋΘ│ί░Σϊ╕Αϊ╕ςϊ╕║ύεθόΩ╢ϊ╕║ύεθΎ╝Ι**ίΖ╝όΙΨ**Ύ╝Νinclusive orΎ╝ΚήΑΓϊ╛ΜΎ╝γ"$x > 0$ όΙΨ $x = 0$"ίΝΖόΜυϊ║Η $x=0$ ύγΕόΔΖίΗ╡ήΑΓό│ρόΕΠϋ┐βϊ╕ΟόΩξί╕╕ϋψφϋρΑϊ╕φύγΕ"όΟΤϊ╗ΨόΙΨ"ϊ╕ΞίΡΝήΑΓ


The truth value of "P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$" is True assuming that Q holds whenver P holds. The truth value is False only in the case where P is True and yet Q is False. We refer to P as the hypothesis of the conditional statement and Q as the conclusion. That key word "whenever" in the definition should indicate to you why the false hypothesis cases make sense. When we know P is true and can deduce that Q is also true, then we get to declare P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ as True. If P wasn't true to begin with, we cannot declare P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ to be False. We only get to say P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ is false when Q did not necessarily follow from P, i.e. when there is an instance where the hypothesis P is True but the conclusion Q is False.
Examples
Here are several examples to help you get the idea: (1 + 3 = 4) =$\Rightarrow(\forall x \in \mathbb{R}. x2 \geq$0) True (1 + 3 = 5) =$\Rightarrow(\forall x \in \mathbb{R}. x2 \geq$0) True (1 + 3 = 5) =$\Rightarrow$(Abraham Lincoln is alive) True (1 + 1 = 2) =$\Rightarrow$(0 = 1) False (0 = 0) =$\Rightarrow$($\exists x$ $\in \mathbb{R}$. x2 < 0) False (Pythagorean Theorem) =$\Rightarrow$(1 = 1) True (0 = 1) =$\Rightarrow$(1 = 1) True Notice that the second and third examples are True because they have the false hypothesis "1 + 3 = 5". Regardless of the conclusion, the entire conditional statement must be True because of this. It doesn't matter that "$\forall x$ $\in \mathbb{R}$. x2 $\geq$0" happens to be True or that "Abraham Lincoln is alive" happens to be False; that false hypothesis determines the statement's truth value. Also, notice that the second-to-last example is True, but it doesn't help us determine whether or not the Pythagorean Theorem itself is True! This is what we did in the False "spoof" of the theorem back in Chapter 1. Look back to Section 1.1.1, specficially "Proof 2". We assumed the Pythagorean Theorem was True and then logically derived a True statement from that assumption. That does not make the hypothesis valid, just because we derived a valid conclusion! This idea is so important, that we will even show you again this striking example. Notice that it's logical form is exactly the same as that other spoof: "Proof". Assume 1 = 0. Then, by the symmetric property of =, it is also true that 0 = 1. Adding these two equations tells us 1 = 1, which is True. Therefore, 0 = 1. This is the main point here: Knowing a conditional statement, overall, is True, doesn't tell us anything about the truth values of the constituent propositions.


> ΏθΘρΏθΘ│ **όζκϊ╗╢ϋψφίΠξΎ╝ΙConditionalΎ╝Ν$\Rightarrow$Ύ╝Κ** "ϋΜξ $P$ ίΙβ $Q$"ίΗβϊ╜ε $P \Rightarrow Q$ήΑΓ$P$ ύπ░ϊ╕║ίΒΘϋχ╛Ύ╝ΙHypothesisΎ╝ΚΎ╝ΝQ ύπ░ϊ╕║ύ╗Υϋχ║Ύ╝ΙConclusionΎ╝ΚήΑΓίΖ│ώΦχϋπΓίψθΎ╝γί╜Υ P ϊ╕║ίΒΘόΩ╢Ύ╝Ν$P \Rightarrow Q$ ϋΘςίΛρϊ╕║ύεθέΑΦέΑΦίδιϊ╕║όζκϊ╗╢ϋψφίΠξίψ╣ $P$ ϊ╕║ίΒΘύγΕόΔΖίΗ╡ϊ╕ΞίΒγϊ╗╗ϊ╜ΧόΨφϋρΑΎ╝Νϊ╕ΞϋΔ╜ίχμύπ░ίΖ╢ϊ╕║ίΒΘΎ╝ΝόΧΖύΦ▒όΟΤϊ╕φί╛ΜύθξίΖ╢ϊ╕║ύεθήΑΓ


This is also strikingly illustrated in the third and seventh statements above; both conditional claims are True, but we certainly don't get to conclude that Abraham Lincoln is alive, or that 0 = 1. "Implies" is not the same as "Can be deduced from" There is often some confusion with using the word "implies" to mean an "If . . . then . . . " statement, a conditional statement. We belive this arises because of some connotations surrounding the word "implies"; specifically, it seems to convey some sort of causality. For instance, consider this statement: 1 + 3 = 4 =$\Rightarrow$2 + 3 = 5 This is a True conditional statement, and our minds probably recognize this because we can just take the hypothesis, namely 1 + 3 = 4, and add 1 to both sides, yielding the equation in the conclusion. In this sense, it seems that the truth of the hypothesis has some influence on the truth of the conclusion: we can deduce one directly from the other. This does not have to be the case, in general! Look back at the first example given above: (1 + 3 = 4) =$\Rightarrow$($\forall x$ $\in \mathbb{R}$. x2 $\geq$0) What does the fact that 1+3 = 4 have to do with the fact that any real number squared is non-negative? Does it even have any connection? We don't actually care! We can still identify this conditional statement as True, whether or not we can find a way to deduce the conclusion directly from the hypothesis (and whether or not such a deduction even exists). Only the truth values of the constituent statements matter. Granted, when we work on proving conditional statements, we will likely try to deduce one statement directly from another. It's important to keep in mind, though, that this is a consequence of our proof strategy, and not an underlying part of how conditional statements are defined. For these reasons, we tend to write conditional statements using the "If . . . then . . . " form, instead of using "implies". We might sometimes use it, and we're sure you'll see it in other mathematical writings. For now, though, we'll try to avoid it as much as possible, while we're still learning about these logical statements and connectives. Quantifying Variables: Still Important! In mathematics, we often want to prove conditional statements that involve variables. For instance, we might want to show that, in the context of the real numbers R, the following conditional claim holds: x > 1 =$\Rightarrow x$2 έΙΤ1 > 0 That sentence, written in the line above, is itself a variable proposition, and the definition of the symbol " =$\Rightarrow$" applies to it.


> ΏθΘρΏθΘ│ **ύσ║ϋβγύεθΎ╝ΙVacuous TruthΎ╝Κ** όζκϊ╗╢ϋψφίΠξίερίΒΘϋχ╛ϊ╕║ίΒΘόΩ╢ϊ╕║ύεθΎ╝Νϋ┐βύπ░ϊ╕║"ύσ║ϋβγύεθ"ήΑΓϋβ╜ύΕ╢ίΠΞύδ┤ϋπΚΎ╝Νϊ╜Ηϋ┐βόαψώΑ╗ϋ╛Σύ│╗ύ╗θύγΕί┐ΖϋοΒύ║οίχγήΑΓϊ╛ΜΎ╝γ"ϋΜξ $1 > 2$Ύ╝ΝίΙβόεΙϊ║χόαψίξ╢ώΖςίΒγύγΕ"έΑΦέΑΦϋ┐βόαψϊ╕Αϊ╕ςύεθίΣ╜ώλαΎ╝Νίδιϊ╕║ίΒΘϋχ╛ϊ╕║ίΒΘήΑΓ


If we knew that x > 1 and also x2 έΙΤ1 > 0, then we could declare the conditional to be True. If we knew that x $\leq$1, then we wouldn't even care whether x2 έΙΤ1 > 0 or not; we could declare the conditional to be True. This is how the definition of " =$\Rightarrow$" applies here. Remember, though, that the conditional claim, as written above, is not technically a mathematical statement. We were making that claim in the context of the real numbers, so it would really make sense to write $\forall x$ $\in \mathbb{R}$.  x > 1 =$\Rightarrow x$2 έΙΤ1 > 0  $This is, ultimately, what the writer was trying to claim, so they should just say so! We make the same recommendation to you. These logical connectives--- \wedgeand \veeand = \Rightarrow$---make sense and can be applied to variable propositions. Outside of that scope, somewhere else in the statement you're putting together, there must be some kind of quantification on those variables. Only then can we be assured that the sentence is a mathematical statement with one truth value. Writing " =$\Rightarrow$" using "$\vee$" There is a useful and important idea worth mentioning. This is partly because we will use it later, but also partly because it might help you understand conditional statements and learn how to use them. This idea hinges on the notion of a false hypothesis. Consider a conditional statement, P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$. If P fails, then the entire statement is True, regardless of Q's truth value. However, if P holds, then we definitely need Q to hold, as well, to declare the entire statement to be True. These observations allow us to identify two ways in which a conditional statement can hold, and write these two ways in an "or" $statement. Either \negP holds (i.e. a false hypothesis), or else Q holds. In either of these situations, the conditional statement P = \Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ must hold! Let's state this claim outright for you to consider: The conditional statement "P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$" and the statement "$\negP \veeQ$" $have the same truth value. This is a good example of a logical equivalence, which is a topic we will discuss in the next section. For now, we will present the truth table for the two statements mentioned above. Notice that they have the same truth value, regardless of the truth values of the constituent statements, P and Q. This serves as further verification that the statements are equivalent, in addition to the description we provided above. P Q \negP \negP \veeQ P = \Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ T T F T T T F F F F F T T T T F F T T T


> ΏθΘρΏθΘ│ **ίΠΝόζκϊ╗╢ϋψφίΠξΎ╝ΙBiconditionalΎ╝Ν$\Leftrightarrow$Ύ╝Κ** "$P$ ί╜Υϊ╕Φϊ╗Ζί╜Υ $Q$"ίΗβϊ╜ε $P \Leftrightarrow Q$Ύ╝ΝίΞ│ $(P \Rightarrow Q) \wedge (Q \Rightarrow P)$ήΑΓί╜Υϊ╕Φϊ╗Ζί╜Υ $P$ ίΤΝ $Q$ ίΖ╖όεΚύδ╕ίΡΝύεθίΑ╝όΩ╢ϊ╕║ύεθήΑΓ


Investigating More Examples Let's consider some more examples of conditional claims and decide whether they are True or False. In so doing, we are helping you to better understand how =$\Rightarrow w$orks. Then, we'll move on to proof strategies and discuss how to formally and rigorously prove claims like these, with logical connectives and quantifiers.
Example 4.5.6. We will start here with a "real world" example, to get used to
the logic involved. Throughout this example, pretend we are in a class that only has lectures officially scheduled on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays. You'll notice that we will take two statements, P and Q, and consider all four possible combinations of these statements and their negations to make conditional statements. έΑλ "If we have lecture today, then it is a weekday." (Note: There is some implicit quantification in this sentence. We are really saying that "For all days d in the weekly calendar, if we have lecture on day d, then d is a weekday." We think that the main idea is conveyed more succinctly by the sentence above, so we will use that version. Keep in mind that this is the meaning of the sentence and, in our discussion below, we will have to consider the different cases of that quantification.) This can be written logically by defining P to be "We have lecture today" and Q to be "Today is a weekday"; then the claim is P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$. Is this True? Notice that the statements P and Q don't specify what day it is, so if we were to assert this claim to be True, that truth should be independent of the current day. That is, whatever day it is, we would have to show that P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ holds. Let's do that by considering a few cases: -- Pretend today is Saturday or Sunday. Since we never have lecture on these days, the conditional claim is not a lie, so it is True. -- Pretend today is Monday or Wednesday or Friday. If we do, indeed, have lecture today, then it is definitely a weekday, so the claim is True. -- Pretend today is Tuesday or Thursday. We don't typically have lecture today, but even in the special case that we did (for some rescheduling reason), it would still be a weekday, so the claim is True. In any of the possible cases, the claim holds. Thus, P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ is True. You might interject to say, "Why bother with the cases at all? Couldn't we just say that no matter what day it is, supposing we have lecture, then we conclude it is definitely a weekday?" Well, yes, we could! That's actually a better strategy, a more direct route, you might say. This hints at how we will prove conditional claims in the future. Since we don't, in fact, care about the situations where we don't have lecture (the


> ΏθΘρΏθΘ│ **ύεθίΑ╝ϋκρό▒ΘόΑ╗**

| $P$ | $Q$ | $P \wedge Q$ | $P \vee Q$ | $P \Rightarrow Q$ | $P \Leftrightarrow Q$ |
|-----|-----|---------|---------|------------|-------------|
| T | T | T | T | T | T |
| T | F | F | T | F | F |
| F | T | F | T | T | F |
| F | F | F | F | T | T |


false hypothesis) we only need to suppose we have lecture on day X and deduce that X is a weekday. This is the method we will use to directly prove a conditional claim. έΑλ "If it is a weekday, then we have lecture today." This is logically written as Q =$\Rightarrow P$, using the same definitions of P and Q as the previous example. Is this claim True? Definitely not! We didn't have lecture on the first Tuesday of the semester, yet that day was a weekday. Thus, the claimer lied in that instance! On that Tuesday, Q was True but P was False. Thus, Q =$\Rightarrow P$ is False. έΑλ "If it is not a weekday, then we don't have lecture today." $This is logically written as \negQ = \Rightarrow \negP, using the same definitions of P and Q as the example above. Is this claim True$? Yes, and we can prove it directly. Suppose that it is not a weekday; $that is, pretend today is Saturday or Sunday. Obviously, the university would not be so sadistic as to schedule a lecture on a weekend, so we can necessarily declare that we don't have lecture, i.e. \negP holds. This shows that \negQ = \Rightarrow \negP is a True statement. (Question$: Why did we not need to consider the case where today is a weekday?) έΑλ "If we don't have lecture today, it is not a weekday." $This is logically written as \negP = \Rightarrow \negQ, using the same definitions of P and Q as the example above. Is this claim True$? Well, let's think about it. What if we pretend we don't have lecture today. What can we necessarily say? Is it definitely not a weekday? I don't think so! Maybe it's a Tuesday, and we just don't have a scheduled lecture. This shows that the claim is False; $we have an instance where the hypothesis (\negP) holds, and yet the conclusion (\negQ) does not hold. Notice that there are situations where \negP holds and \negQ does, as well. For instance, if today were Saturday, then certainly we don't have lecture and it is not a weekday. This specific instance does not meant that the claim is True, though! We need to verify its truth for all instances.$
Example 4.5.7. Let's do the same kind of analysis with a more "mathy" example.
Throughout this example, let A and B be arbitrary sets. Also, let P be "A $\subseteq B$", and let Q be "A έΙΤB = $\emptyset$". We will do what we did in the previous example and consider all four possible ways of combining P and Q and their negations to make conditional statements. έΑλ Is P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ True?


> ΏθΘρΏθΘ│ **ύδ╕ίΖ│όζκϊ╗╢ϋψφίΠξ** όζκϊ╗╢ϋψφίΠξ $P \Rightarrow Q$ όεΚϊ╕ΚύπΞύδ╕ίΖ│ί╜λί╝ΠΎ╝γ
- **ώΑΗίΡοίΣ╜ώλαΎ╝ΙContrapositiveΎ╝Κ**Ύ╝γ$\neg Q \Rightarrow \neg P$έΑΦέΑΦϊ╕ΟίΟθίΣ╜ώλαίΡΝύεθίΑ╝
- **ώΑΗίΣ╜ώλαΎ╝ΙConverseΎ╝Κ**Ύ╝γ$Q \Rightarrow P$έΑΦέΑΦϊ╕Ξϊ╕Αίχγϊ╕ΟίΟθίΣ╜ώλαίΡΝύεθίΑ╝
- **ίΡοίΣ╜ώλαΎ╝ΙInverseΎ╝Κ**Ύ╝γ$\neg P \Rightarrow \neg Q$έΑΦέΑΦϊ╕ΟώΑΗίΣ╜ώλαίΡΝύεθίΑ╝

ώΘΞϋοΒΎ╝γόζκϊ╗╢ϋψφίΠξϊ╕ΟίΖ╢ώΑΗίΡοίΣ╜ώλαώΑ╗ϋ╛ΣύφΚϊ╗╖Ύ╝Νϊ╜Ηϊ╕ΟώΑΗίΣ╜ώλαϊ╕ΞύφΚϊ╗╖Ύ╝Β


Yes! Let's pretend A and B satisfy the relationship A $\subseteq B$. This means every element of A is also an element of B. Therefore, we cannot possibly have an element of A that does not belong to B, Since A έΙΤB is the set of elements that belong to A and not B, we conclude that there are no such elements, so A έΙΤB = $\emptyset$. έΑλ Is Q =$\Rightarrow P$ True? Yes! Let's pretend A έΙΤB = $\emptyset$. This means there are no elements of A that are also not elements of B. (Think about this.) Put another way, any element x $\in A$ cannot have the property that x $\notin B$ (or else x $\in A$ έΙΤB and so A έΙΤB \neq $\emptyset$); thus, x $\in B$, necessarily. Hey, this is exactly what A $\subseteq B$ means! Whenever x $\in A$, we conclude x $\in B$, too. This shows Q =$\Rightarrow P$ is true. έΑλ $Is \negQ = \Rightarrow \negP True$? $Hmm, this is harder to figure out. Let's pretend \negQ holds$; this means A έΙΤB \neq $\emptyset$. That is, there exists some element x that satisfies x $\in A$ and x $\notin B$. Certainly, then A ╠╕$\subseteq B$, because we have identified an element of A that is not an element of B (whereas the $\subseteq relationship would dictate that every element of A is also an element of B). Thus, \negQ = \Rightarrow \negP is True.$ έΑλ $Is \negP = \Rightarrow \negQ True$? $Again, we need to think about this. Let's just write down what \negP means. To say A$ ╠╕$\subseteq B$ means there exists some element x $\in A$ that also satisfies x $\notin B$. (This is what we used in the previous case, too.) Okay, what does that tell us? Consider the set A έΙΤB. Does it have any elements? Yes, it has at least x as an element! Since x $\in A \wedgex / \in B, we can say x \in A$ έΙΤB. Thus, A έΙΤB \neq $\emptyset , so we conclude that \negP = \Rightarrow \negQ is True. Observations and Facts About$ " =$\Rightarrow$" Okay, now we have some practice working with conditional statements and determining their truth values. What you should notice from the examples we discussed is that knowing P =$\Rightarrow$ Q holds does not tell us anything about Q =$\Rightarrow P$. In both of these examples above, P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ was True; however, Q =$\Rightarrow P$ was True in one example and False in the other. There is nothing we can necessarily say, with certainty, about Q =$\Rightarrow P$, even if we know the truth value of P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$. This idea is so important, that we will touch on it in the next subsection. For now, let's make a few more remarks about the " =$\Rightarrow$" connective. έΑλ Remember that, given mathematical statements P and Q, the sentence "P =$\Rightarrow$ Q" is, itself, another mathematical statement. It has a truth value. That truth value depends on P and Q (in the way we defined it


> ΏθΘρΏθΘ│ **ύν║ϊ╛Μ** ϋχ╛ $P$ ϊ╕║"$n$ όαψίΒ╢όΧ░"Ύ╝Ν$Q$ ϊ╕║"$n^2$ όαψίΒ╢όΧ░"ήΑΓ
- ίΣ╜ώλα $P \Rightarrow Q$Ύ╝γ"ϋΜξ $n$ όαψίΒ╢όΧ░Ύ╝ΝίΙβ $n^2$ όαψίΒ╢όΧ░"έΑΦέΑΦύεθ
- ώΑΗίΣ╜ώλα $Q \Rightarrow P$Ύ╝γ"ϋΜξ $n^2$ όαψίΒ╢όΧ░Ύ╝ΝίΙβ $n$ όαψίΒ╢όΧ░"έΑΦέΑΦύεθΎ╝Ιόφνϊ╛Μϊ╕φόΒ░ίξ╜ϊ╣θϊ╕║ύεθΎ╝Νϊ╜Ηϊ╕ΞόΑ╗όαψίοΓόφνΎ╝Κ
- ώΑΗίΡοίΣ╜ώλα $\neg Q \Rightarrow \neg P$Ύ╝γ"ϋΜξ $n^2$ ϊ╕ΞόαψίΒ╢όΧ░Ύ╝ΝίΙβ $n$ ϊ╕ΞόαψίΒ╢όΧ░"έΑΦέΑΦύεθΎ╝Ιϊ╕ΟίΟθίΣ╜ώλαώΑ╗ϋ╛ΣύφΚϊ╗╖Ύ╝Κ


above), but it does not tell us anything about the truth values of P and Q. So, if you just write down the claim Blah blah =$\Rightarrow$ Yada yada on your paper, we have no idea if you're trying to assert whether "Blah blah" or "Yada yada" are True or False! To a mathematician, this just says: The conditional statement " 'Blah blah' implies 'Yada yada' " is True. If you wish to make some kind of inference or deduction, then use some helping words and sentences to indicate that. Write something like this: P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ because . . . Also, P holds because . . . Therefore, Q holds. If you have studied formal logic before, or have seen this type of argument in a philosophy course, then you might recognize this as Modus Ponens. έΑλ The idea of a false hypothesis yielding a True conditional is kind of weird; we realize this. It's a direct consequence of the Law of the Excluded Middle. Under a false hypothesis, we don't get to say the overall statement is False, so it must be True, since it must be one or the other. έΑλ Remember that we can always write a conditional statement without the " =$\Rightarrow$" symbol by converting it to an "or" statement. The statements "P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$" and "$\negP \veeQ$" always have they always have the same truth value. Converse and Contrapositive Let's give some names to the different types of conditional statements related to a given conditional statement. We will refer to these frequently later on.
<div class="def-definition" markdown>
**Definition 4.5.8. Let P and Q be mathematical statements.**
</div>
Consider the "original" claim, P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$. We refer to Q =$\Rightarrow P as the converse of the original claim. We refer to \negQ = \Rightarrow \negP as the contrapositive of the original claim. By our observations in the previous subsection, we know that the converse does not necessarily have the same truth value as the original. What we will see (and prove) in the next section is that the contrapositive always has the same truth value as the original claim. (This is the notion of logical equivalence, which we will discuss in full detail in the next section.)$


> ΏθΘρΏθΘ│ **ί┐ΖϋοΒϊ╕ΟίΖΖίΙΗόζκϊ╗╢** "ϋΜξ $P$ ίΙβ $Q$"ϊ╕φΎ╝γ
- $P$ όαψ $Q$ ύγΕ**ίΖΖίΙΗόζκϊ╗╢Ύ╝ΙSufficient ConditionΎ╝Κ**Ύ╝γ$P$ όΙΡύτΜϋ╢│ϊ╗ξϊ┐ζϋψΒ $Q$ όΙΡύτΜ
- $Q$ όαψ $P$ ύγΕ**ί┐ΖϋοΒόζκϊ╗╢Ύ╝ΙNecessary ConditionΎ╝Κ**Ύ╝γ$Q$ ί┐Ζώκ╗όΙΡύτΜόΚΞϋΔ╜ϊ╜┐ $P$ όΙΡύτΜ

ϊ╛ΜΎ╝γ"$n$ όαψίΒ╢όΧ░"όαψ"$n^2$ όαψίΒ╢όΧ░"ύγΕίΖΖίΙΗόζκϊ╗╢Ύ╝δ"$n^2$ όαψίΒ╢όΧ░"όαψ"$n$ όαψίΒ╢όΧ░"ύγΕί┐ΖϋοΒόζκϊ╗╢ήΑΓ


You might wonder why we need this terminology at all. Well, since the contrapositive can be shown to be logically equivalent to the original claim, it gives rise to a valid proof method when we try to prove conditional statements. We will develop that very soon. That's why we use the contrapositive. The converse is interesting because its truth value is not necessarily tied to that of the original statement: even knowing the original is True, the converse might be True and it might be False. Thus, whenever we prove a claim P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ to be true, a mathematician (probably) immediately wonders, "Hmm, does the converse also hold?" It's a natural question to ask, and worth thinking about whenever you face a conditional statement. (In fact, if you ever find yourself at a party with mathematicians, and you hear someone talking about an "If . . . then . . . " statement, you should ask, "Does the converse hold, as well?" You might impress your fellow guests.) The converse is also the subject of a common logical fallacy you might encounter in everyday life. Perhaps you are trying to argue that A =$\Rightarrow B$ in a debate with a friend. What if they retort, "Well, B doesn't necessarily imply A! Your argument is wrong!" Have you ever been frustrated by that situation? You might have been tempted to shout, "So what? I wasn't trying to say anything about whether B =$\Rightarrow A$. I was talking about A =$\Rightarrow B$, you . . . " (We'll cut ourselves offbefore we get mean.) Whether or not your friend is right, knowing the truth value of the converse doesn't tell you anything about the truth value of your original claim. You should tell them that! Next time, just say, "You're talking about the converse, which is not necessarily logically connected to my claim." Okay, now that we have defined all of the requisite logical symbols and seen some examples, it's time to move on and start proving things about them! But first, a short aside about set operations, and then a few practice problems.
### 4.5.4 Looking Back: Set Operations and Logical Connectives Look back at Sections 3.4 and 3.5, where we defined subsets and set operations. All of those definitions made use of some logical ideas, but we wrote them in English back then, relying on our collective intuition and working knowledge of logic. We can rewrite them now using quantifiers and connectives! First, recall the definition of subset. We write A $\subseteq B$ if the following holds: whenever x $\in A$, we can also say x $\in B$. Notice that key word, "whenever", which signals both a universal quantification and a conditional statement. Think about how you would rewrite the definition of A $\subseteq B$, using this notion, then read on to see our version . . .
<div class="def-definition" markdown>
**Definition 4.5.9. Let A, B, U be sets, where A, B $\subseteq U$ (i.e. U is a universal**
</div>
set). We say A is a subset of B, and write A $\subseteq B$, if and only if $\forall x$ $\in U$. x $\in A$ =$\Rightarrow x$ $\in B$


> ΏθΘρΏθΘ│ **"Only if"** "$P only if Q$"όΕΠόΑζόαψ $P \Rightarrow Q$Ύ╝ΝίΞ│"ίΠςόεΚίερ $Q$ όΙΡύτΜόΩ╢ $P$ όΚΞόΙΡύτΜ"ήΑΓό│ρόΕΠΎ╝γ"$P if Q$"όαψ $Q \Rightarrow P$Ύ╝ΝϋΑΝ"$P only if Q$"όαψ $P \Rightarrow Q$έΑΦέΑΦόΨ╣ίΡΣύδ╕ίΠΞΎ╝Β

ϊ╛ΜΎ╝γ"$n$ όαψίΒ╢όΧ░ only if $n^2$ όαψίΒ╢όΧ░"ύφΚϊ╗╖ϊ║Ο"ϋΜξ $n$ όαψίΒ╢όΧ░Ύ╝ΝίΙβ $n^2$ όαψίΒ╢όΧ░"ήΑΓ


This makes sense because it asserts that "whenever" statement we wrote in the above paragraph: whenever x $\in A$, we must also be able to conclude x $\in B$; "if x $\in A$, then x $\in B$" must hold. Look back again at the definitions of the set operations we gave. Try to write your own versions of those definitions using logical symbols and then read ours here. Think about how they make sense, how they express the same underlying ideas.
<div class="def-definition" markdown>
**Definition 4.5.10. Let A, B, U be sets, where A, B $\subseteq U$ (i.e. U is a universal**
</div>
set). Then, A $\cap B$ = {x $\in U$ | x $\in A \wedgex \in B$} A $\cup B$ = {x $\in U$ | x $\in A \veex \in B$} A έΙΤB = {x $\in U$ | x $\in A \wedge\neg(x \in B$)} = {x $\in U$ | x $\in A \wedgex / \in B$} A = {x $\in U$ | $\neg(x \in A$)} = {x $\in U$ | x $\notin A$} While we're here, we can also redefine a partition of a set. This will make use of logical connectives, but this also hearkens back to indexed sets and how they are defined in terms of quantifiers. Everything we've learned is coming together here!
<div class="def-definition" markdown>
**Definition 4.5.11. Let A be a set. A partition of A is a collection of sets**
</div>
that are pairwise disjoint and whose union is A. That is, a partition is formed by an index set I and non-empty sets Si (defined for every i $\in I$) that satisfy the following conditions: (1) $\forall i$ $\in I$. Si $\subseteq A$. (2) $\forall i$, j $\in I$. i \neq j =$\Rightarrow S$i $\cap S$j = $\emptyset$. (3) [ i$\in I$ Si = A Look back to Definition 3.6.9 to see how we originally defined a partition. Do you see how we are saying the same thing here, just using logical symbols?
### 4.5.5 Questions & Exercises
$Remind Yourself Answering the following questions briefly, either out loud or in writing. These are all based on the section you just read, so if you can't recall a specific definition or concept or example, go back and reread that part. Making sure you can confidently answer these before moving on will help your understanding and memory! (1) What is the difference between \wedgeand \vee$?


> ΏθΘρΏθΘ│ **ύ╗ΕίΡΙϋΒΦύ╗ΥϋψΞ** ϋΒΦύ╗ΥϋψΞίΠψϊ╗ξύ╗ΕίΡΙϊ╜┐ύΦρήΑΓϊ╛ΜΎ╝γ$P \wedge (Q \vee R)$ ϋκρύν║"$P$ ϊ╕ΦΎ╝Ι$Q$ όΙΨ $R$Ύ╝Κ"ήΑΓόΜυίΠ╖ίΗ│ίχγϊ║Ηϋ┐ΡύχΩώκ║ί║ΠήΑΓό▓κόεΚόΜυίΠ╖όΩ╢Ύ╝ΝίΡοίχγ $\neg$ ϊ╝αίΖΙύ║πόεΑώταΎ╝ΝύΕ╢ίΡΟόαψ $\wedge$Ύ╝ΝίΗΞ $\vee$Ύ╝ΝόεΑίΡΟ $\Rightarrow$ ίΤΝ $\Leftrightarrow$ήΑΓ


$(2) What is the difference between \wedgeand \cap$? $What is the difference between \veeand \cup$? (3) Write out a truth table for the statement P =$\Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$. (4) Why are P =$\Rightarrow Q and \negP \veeQ logically equivalent statements$? (5) What is the converse of a conditional statement? What is the contrapositive of a conditional statement? (6) Are the truth values of a conditional statement and its converse related? Try It Try answering the following short-answer questions. They require you to actually write something down, or describe something out loud (to a friend/classmate, perhaps). The goal is to get you to practice working with new concepts, definitions, and notation. They are meant to be easy, though; making sure you can work through them will help you! (1) For each of the following sentences, rewrite it using logical notation and determine whether it is True or False. (a) Every integer is either strictly positive or strictly negative. (b) For any given real number, there exists a natural number that is strictly bigger. (c) For every real number, if it is negative, then its cube is also negative. (d) There is a subset of Z that has the property that whenever a number is an element of that set, so is its square. (e) There is a natural number that is both even and odd. (2) Rewrite each of the following $\forall c$laims as a conditional statement, and determine whether it is True or False. (a) $\forall x$ $\in${y $\in \mathbb{N}$ | $\exists k$ $\in \mathbb{Z}$. y = 2k}. x2 $\in${y $\in \mathbb{N}$ | $\exists k$ $\in \mathbb{Z}$. y = 2k} (b) $\forall x$ $\in${y $\in \mathbb{N}$ | $\exists k$ $\in \mathbb{Z}$. y = 2k + 1}. x2 $\in${y $\in \mathbb{N}$ | $\exists k$ $\in \mathbb{Z}$. y = 2k + 1} (c) $\forall t$ $\in${z $\in \mathbb{R}$ | z2 > 4}. t > 2 (3) Rewrite each of the following conditional statements as a $\forall c$laim, using set-builder notation, and determine whether it is True or False. (a) $\forall x$ $\in \mathbb{R}$. x > 3 =$\Rightarrow x$2 < 9 (b) $\forall x$ $\in \mathbb{R}$. x < 3 =$\Rightarrow x$2 < 9 (c) $\forall t$ $\in \mathbb{R}$. t2 έΙΤ6t + 9 $\geq$0 =$\Rightarrow t$ $\geq$3


> ΏθΘρΏθΘ│ **ύ╗Δϊ╣ι** (1) ίψ╣ίΣ╜ώλα $P$Ύ╝γ"$x > 3$"ίΤΝ $Q$Ύ╝γ"$x > 5$"Ύ╝Ι$x \in \mathbb{R}$Ύ╝ΚΎ╝ΝίΙνόΨφ $P \Rightarrow Q$ήΑΒ$Q \Rightarrow P$ήΑΒ$P \Leftrightarrow Q$ ύγΕύεθίΑ╝ήΑΓ(2) ίΗβίΘ║ $P \Rightarrow Q$ ύγΕώΑΗίΡοίΣ╜ώλαήΑΒώΑΗίΣ╜ώλαίΤΝίΡοίΣ╜ώλαήΑΓ


(4) Let's define the following variable propositions: P(x) is " 1 2 < x " Q(x) is " x < 3 2 " R(x) is " x2 = 4 " S(x) is " x + 1 $\in \mathbb{N}$ " For each of the following statements, determine whether it is True or False. (a) $\forall x$ $\in \mathbb{N}$. P(x) (b) $\forall x$ $\in \mathbb{N}$. Q(x) =$\Rightarrow P$(x) (c) $\forall x$ $\in \mathbb{Z}$. Q(x) =$\Rightarrow P$(x) (d) $\exists x$ $\in N. \negS(x) \veeR(x) (e) \exists x \in Z. R(x) \wedge\negS(x) (f) \forall x \in \mathbb{R}$. R(x) =$\Rightarrow S(x) (g) \exists x \in R. P(x) \wedgeS(x) (h) \forall x \in \mathbb{Z}$. R(x) =$\Rightarrow$  $P(x) \veeQ(x)$  (5) For each of the following conditional statements, write it in logical notation, and use this write its converse and its contrapositive; then, determine the truth values of all three: the original statement, the converse, and the contrapositive. (a) If a real number is strictly between 0 and 1, then so is its square. (b) If a natural number is even, then so is its cube. (c) Whenever an integer is a multiple of 10, it is a multiple of 5.
## 4.6 Logical Equivalence In this section, the major goal is to introduce the idea of logical equivalence and prove a few fundamental claims. Essentially, we want to decide when some complicated logical statements are actually "the same", in the sense of truth values. Since mathematical statements may depend on some propositional variables, we might not be able to conclude anything specific about their truth values. However, we can sometimes prove that two mathematical statements will have the same truth value, for all possible values of the variables they contain. That's a really nice conclusion to make! We get to say that they have the same truth value, regardless of what it is. In that sense, we are proving the two statements to be equivalent, in a logical sense.


> ΏθΘρΏθΘ│ (3) όΚ╛ϊ╕Αϊ╕ςϊ╜┐ $P \Rightarrow Q$ ϊ╕║ύεθϊ╜Η $Q \Rightarrow P$ ϊ╕║ίΒΘύγΕϊ╛ΜίφΡήΑΓ(4) ύΦρύεθίΑ╝ϋκρώςΝϋψΒ $P \Rightarrow Q$ ίΤΝ $\neg Q \Rightarrow \neg P$ ώΑ╗ϋ╛ΣύφΚϊ╗╖ήΑΓ(5) ϋπμώΘΛ"ύσ║ϋβγύεθ"ϊ╕║ϊ╜ΧόαψώΑ╗ϋ╛Σύ│╗ύ╗θύγΕί┐ΖϋοΒύ║οίχγΎ╝Νύ╗βίΘ║ϊ╕Αϊ╕ςϋψ┤όαΟόΑπϊ╛ΜίφΡήΑΓ


